From:
                                                                Wed 11:04 PM
Subject: Re: Nuts

On Tue, 19 Oct 1999 22:31:09 -0700, Chuck McManis
<cmcmanis-delete-this@mcmanis.com> wrote:

>Ok, this is driving me nuts. And I even got out my tinkertoys to
>visualize it!
>
There are several levels on which you are driving yourself nuts.

>The background is that I'm implementing all of the viewing systems from
>Watt and of course started with Viewing System I which uses polar
>co-ordinates and a scalar to represent the view point (which always
>looks toward the world origin.)
>
>Now if view system consists of a rotation about Y and a rotation about
>X,

A view system does not consist of a rotation about Y and a rotation
about X.  A view system is a frame, defined by an origin and an
ordered set of three orthonormal vectors.  No particular rotations
about coordinate axes are implied by the view system. And in fact, you
CANNOT construct Watt's view system by rotations and translations
alone, because he uses a right-handed world system and a left-handed
view system.  Rotations and translations preserve handedness, so you
know you have to use reflections as well to construct a handedness
reversing transformations  from elementary affine transformations--
rotations and translations  alonewon't do the job for Watt.

>the point '5, 5, 5' in cartesian space ends up being a 45 degree
>rotation and a 54.74 degree rotation and a scalar equal to sqrt(75).

Ummm, the point with cartesian coordinates (5, 5, 5) has polar
coordinates (sqrt(75), 45 degrees, 54.74 degrees) but it makes no
sense whatever to say that a point "ends up being a sequence of
rotations".  Rotations are mappings of the space; each given rotation
maps all the points, all the axes to (generally) other points and
other axes.   A point alone, no matter what coordinate representation
you use for it, does not define any rotations, without additional
implied data.  If you have a partcular mechanical setup, such as a
telescope with an azimuth-altitude mounting, then a particular
sequence of rotations for pointing it at any point of the celestial
sphere is implied, but in general, a point on the sphere does not in
itself define any rotations.

>But
>why it isn't simply two 45 degree rotations is driving me nuts.
>

OK you are trying to rotate the vector (0, 0, 1) so that it points in
the direction from (0,0,0) to (5, 5, 5) (or the negative of that,
depending on how you are going to insert the needed reflection
mentioned above).  There are infinitely many rotations of the space
that will map (0,0,1) to the direction if (5,5,5).  One of them, the
one with the smallest rotation angle,  is the rotation through 54.74
degrees about an axis that is perpendicular to the plane containing
(0,0,1) and (5, 5, 5) and (0,0,0).  That is the angle between these
two vectors.  You are free to drive yourself nuts over why this angle
between these two vectors is not  45 degrees, but in fact it is not.

 You are misleading yourself into thinking  it should be 45 degrees by
some kind of fallacious symmetry thoughts.  Here's the correct
symmetry argument.  The unit vector that points from the origin to
(5,5,5) is (1/sqrt(3), 1/sqrt(3), 1/sqrt(3)).   Certainly by symmetry
this vector makes the same angle with each of the three coordinate
axes, namely
acos(1/sqrt(3)) = 54 degrees.  The vector makes a 54 degree angle with
the Xworld and Yworld, as well as with Zworld.    Why should that
drive you nuts?  Symmetry tells you the angle with each axis must be
the same. The Pythagorean theorem tells you it must be
acos(1/sqrt(3)).     The projection of that vector to the
Xworld-Yworld plane makes a 45 degree angle with each of the Xworld
and Yworld axes, and a 90 degree angle with the Zworld axis -- why
should that drive you nuts?  See how you have broken the symmetry.

So, for whatever reasons (probably not good ones)  you have chosen to
construct an Euler rotation to map (0,0,1) to (1,1,1)/sqrt(3) by first
rotating about Zworld to map Xworld to the axis perpendicular to the
plane of Zworld and (1,1,1) (a 45 degree rotation), then rotating
about that axis to bring (0,0,1) to (1,1,1)/sqrt(3) (a 54.74 degree
rotation).

>
>Help me Ron, show me where I screwed up! and how to figure out the
>impact of the first transformation on the results of the second.

Once again, I think it is rather silly to be looking to construct the
transformation to the new frame in terms of rotations about coordinate
axes, the famous trap of Euler-angle thinking.   And this goes double
when you are allowing a handedness change, as Watt is doing in his
so-called "view systems".

Ron
***********************************************************
Dorian Research, Inc.
Berkeley, CA
http://www.dorianresearch.com

  "He's such an inefficient scoundrel that he
   doesn't know the simplest motions of his craft"
                             -- Gully Jimson
************************************************************
